docs(blog): focus indicators (#55)
dhis2/developer-portal: blog/2023-03-01-effective-focus-indicators/index.md

---
slug: 2023/01/effective-focus-indicators
title: Effective and flexible focus indicators
authors: joe
tags: [design, libraries, ui]
---

> How can we design effective and flexible focus indicators for a component library?

Reviewer: We're probably gonna need a longer intro here, so it also displays correct information in the blog post list/homepage. Maybe merge it with the section "What are focus indicators?"

<!--truncate-->

## What are focus indicators?

Focus indicators help people navigate around a webpage or application using a keyboard or assistive technology. Good focus indicators make it clear what element on the page is in `:focus`. To be clear and useful, focus indicators should meet or exceed the [WCAG accessibility guidelines](https://www.w3.org/TR/UNDERSTANDING-WCAG20/navigation-mechanisms-focus-visible.html).

## Focus indicators in DHIS2-ui

> The DHIS2 component library, ui, offers prebuilt components for all kinds of DHIS2 applications. This helps internal and external teams build consistent user experiences.

Reviewer: Maybe rewrite this as 

```suggestion
The [DHIS2 UI component library](https://ui.dhis2.nu) provides a collection of pre-built components that can be used in various types of DHIS2 applications. By utilizing these pre-built components, both internal and external teams can ensure a consistent user experience across different DHIS2 applications.```

> One of DHIS2-ui's guiding principles is to be flexible enough to handle all kinds of use cases. As much as possible, we don't want to limit the usefulness of the components. If a component utility is too narrow then it'll lead to more custom components and less consistency across the platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the core guiding principles of the DHIS2 UI library is to maintain a high level of flexibility that can accommodate a wide range of use cases. Our goal is to avoid imposing unnecessary limits on the usefulness of the components. If a component's functionality is too narrowly defined, it could result in the need for more custom components, which can lead to a less consistent user experience across the platform.
```

A collection of flexible components raises some interesting challenges when designing focus indicators. How can we design focus indicators that:

-   are effective, they do the job well, in a huge number of unknown use cases?
-   are flexible enough to work across all kinds of components?

> In this blog post, we'll review the advantages and disadvantages of some available approaches.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we'll look at the advantages and disadvantages of some available approaches.
```

Breaking component bounds can also cause unwanted interaction between components. For example, two buttons used next to one another can interfere with outlines:

![a button outline overlapped by another button](outline-overlap.png)

This problem has a solution too. Focused elements can increase their `z-index` to ensure they come to the top of the stacking order. But the simple `z-index` solution is problematic in a library that also provides a stacking context. Setting the `z-index` to avoid this problem will likely create problems in other situations, like modals or popovers.

### 2. Outlines inside of the component

Another option is to place an outline on the inside of an element:

![outlines inside a button and text input](outline-inside.png)

#### Advantages of inside outlines

**Self-containment**: The outline doesn't interact with anything outside of the component bounds. This reduces the chances of subpar experiences from unexpected visual clashes. This makes the focus indicator more reliable, an important trait.

> Being self-contained, a component's focus indicator can tested too. We don't need to imagine all the interactions with other elements that would be impossible to test for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being self-contained, a component's focus indicator can be tested too. We don't need to imagine all the interactions with other elements that would be impossible to test for.
```

### 3. Browser default

Browsers have default focus indicators, so should we be messing with them? Different operating systems and browsers use different styles, but not overriding them means they'd be consistent for a single-platform user:

![browser default focus indicators](browser-focus.png)

#### Advantages of browser default outlines

**Deferred responsibility**: The client handles the focus indicator, so it's no longer the library's job. This removes the surface area for necessary fixes or bugs. This doesn't necessarily mean _good focus indicators_ though.
**Customization**: People can set their own browser default focus indicator styles in the user-agent stylesheet. If the library uses browser defaults then they'll inherit any customization too.

#### Disadvantages of browser default outlines

**Default isn't always right**: The default indicators don't always interact well with a component. Different background colors and borders might render the default indicator almost invisible. Components can't be tweaked to accommodate this because different browsers and operating systems have different defaults.

### Conclusion

> As of writing, we've landed on the conclusion that **outlines inside the component** is the right approach for DHIS2-ui.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After careful consideration, we have decided that incorporating **outlines inside each component** is the best approach for DHIS2-ui. Although this approach has some issues, they are limited to the boundary of the component, making it easier to address at the scale of our library and its uses.
```

> The issues with this approach noted above are a concern, but the fact that an issue exists only within the boundary of a component makes it easier to deal with on the scale of our library and its usages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
